How to build a MSI file locally. (#364)
jenkinsci/packaging: msi/docs/build-msi-locally.md

Should you ever need to rebuild a Jenkins MSI on your Windows machine, here is a way to do it.

# Pre-requisites

## Jenkins WAR file

First of all, you should get the Jenkins war file that will be inside that MSI file.
You can get it from the official Jenkins website or from the Jenkins update center.

Check [Jenkins download page](https://www.jenkins.io/download/) and download the latest weekly version of Jenkins for example.
Currently, it is [jenkins.war](https://get.jenkins.io/war/2.380/jenkins.war) version 2.380.

Change the URL according to the version you want to download.

## Git

There are quite a few ways to get Git on Windows, but the most straightforward is to see what the [official Git website recommends](https://git-scm.com/download/win).

## Install MSBuild

You can install [MSBuild](https://aka.ms/vs/17/release/vs_BuildTools.exe) from Visual Studio or from the [Build Tools for Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#build-tools-for-visual-studio-2022).

This command line tool is used to build the MSI file.

> ## Install .NET Framework 3.5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install .NET Framework 3.5
```

You may already have it installed on your machine, but not activated.
You can activate it from the Windows Features dialog box.

> To access this dialog box, smash <kbd>⊞ Win</kbd> + <kbd>R</kbd>, then enter the command `appwiz.cpl` and push enter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access this dialog box, press the keys <kbd>⊞ Win</kbd> + <kbd>R</kbd>, then enter the command `appwiz.cpl` and push enter.
```

Search for

> Turn Windows features on or off.

Tick the `.NET Framework 3.5` entry and install.

Important: now run Windows Update to check for security updates.

If it is not installed yet, you can install [.NET Framework 3.5](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet-framework/net35-sp1) from the Windows Features.

> ## Check you have Powershell 5.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check if you have Windows PowerShell 5.1
```

Reviewer: What if they have PowerShell 7.x? Does it change anything?

FTR: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/whats-new/differences-from-windows-powershell?view=powershell-7.3

Author: I unfortunately have no idea.

In recent versions of Windows, Powershell is already installed and accessible through the [terminal](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/6453ce98-da91-476f-8651-5c14d5777c20#:~:text=In%20Windows%2011%2022H2%2C%20the,an%20instance%20of%20Windows%20Terminal) application.

# Clone the Jenkins repository and build the MSI

## Clone the Jenkins packaging repository

Choose your `git` tool and clone the [Jenkins packaging repository](https://github.com/jenkinsci/packaging.git) on your machine.

## Prepare the build

> Open a `terminal` and go to the folder where you cloned the repository. For me it is `C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open a `terminal` and go to the folder where you cloned the repository. For example `C:\jenkinsci\packaging\`.
```
Simpler path

> You now have to declare where you downloaded the Jenkins war file so that the build can find it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You now have to declare where you downloaded the Jenkins war file so the build can find it.
```

```powershell
$env:War = "$env:USERPROFILE\jenkins.war"
```

If you ever moved it into your repository clone folder, you can use this command instead:

```powershell

> $env:War = "C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.war"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$env:War = "C:\dev\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.war"
```

```

> ## Build the MSI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Build the MSI
```

Enter the subfolder `msi\build` and run the following command:

```powershell
.\build.ps1
```

> For me, this was the output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should get an output similar to:
```

```powershell
Extracting components
JenkinsVersion = 2.380
Restoring packages before build
All packages listed in packages.config are already installed.
Building MSI
MSBuild version 17.4.0+18d5aef85 for .NET Framework
Build started 01/12/2022 20:53:30.
Project "C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.wixproj" on node 1 (default targets).
SetConstants:
  EncodedVersion = 2.255.3800
Compile:
Skipping target "Compile" because all output files are up-to-date with respect to the input files.
AssignCultures:
  Culture: en-US
Link:

>   C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\Light.exe -out C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\bi
>   n\Release\en-US\jenkins-2.380.msi -pdbout C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\bin\Release\en-US\jenkins-2.380.wixpdb -sw1076 -cultures:en-US -ext C:\S
>   upport\users\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixUIExtension.dll -ext C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\bu
>   ild\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixNetFxExtension.dll -ext C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixUtilExte
>   nsion.dll -ext .\msiext-1.5\WixExtensions\WixCommonUIExtension.dll -ext C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixFir
>   ewallExtension.dll -fv -loc jenkins_en-US.wxl -spdb -contentsfile obj\Release\jenkins.wixproj.BindContentsFileListen-US.txt -outputsfile obj\Release\jenkins.wixproj.BindOutputs
>   FileListen-US.txt -builtoutputsfile obj\Release\jenkins.wixproj.BindBuiltOutputsFileListen-US.txt -wixprojectfile C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\
>   jenkins.wixproj obj\Release\jenkins.wixobj
>   Windows Installer XML Toolset Linker version 3.11.1.2318
>   Copyright (c) .NET Foundation and contributors. All rights reserved.
> 
>   jenkins -> C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\bin\Release\en-US\jenkins-2.380.msi
> Done Building Project "C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.wixproj" (default targets).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\Light.exe -out C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\bi
  n\Release\en-US\jenkins-2.380.msi -pdbout C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\bin\Release\en-US\jenkins-2.380.wixpdb -sw1076 -cultures:en-US -ext C:\S
  upport\users\jenkinsci\packaging\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixUIExtension.dll -ext C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\bu
  ild\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixNetFxExtension.dll -ext C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixUtilExte
  nsion.dll -ext .\msiext-1.5\WixExtensions\WixCommonUIExtension.dll -ext C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\packages\WiX.3.11.1\build\..\tools\\WixFir
  ewallExtension.dll -fv -loc jenkins_en-US.wxl -spdb -contentsfile obj\Release\jenkins.wixproj.BindContentsFileListen-US.txt -outputsfile obj\Release\jenkins.wixproj.BindOutputs
  FileListen-US.txt -builtoutputsfile obj\Release\jenkins.wixproj.BindBuiltOutputsFileListen-US.txt -wixprojectfile C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\
  jenkins.wixproj obj\Release\jenkins.wixobj
  Windows Installer XML Toolset Linker version 3.11.1.2318
  Copyright (c) .NET Foundation and contributors. All rights reserved.

  jenkins -> C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\bin\Release\en-US\jenkins-2.380.msi
Done Building Project "C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.wixproj" (default targets).
```

Build succeeded.
    0 Warning(s)
    0 Error(s)

Time Elapsed 00:00:08.26
```

> ## Find the MSI file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Locate the generated MSI file
```

### Check if you have Windows PowerShell

In recent versions of Windows, PowerShell is already installed and accessible through the [terminal](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/6453ce98-da91-476f-8651-5c14d5777c20#:~:text=In%20Windows%2011%2022H2%2C%20the,an%20instance%20of%20Windows%20Terminal) application.
At the time of writing, the pre-installed version is `5.1.22621.963`.
You can also install the latest version from the [Microsoft Store](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/p/powershell/9mz1snwt0n5d?activetab=pivot:overviewtab) (7.3.2 at the time of writing).

## Build the MSI

### Clone the Jenkins packaging repository

Choose your `git` tool and clone the [Jenkins packaging repository](https://github.com/jenkinsci/packaging.git) on your machine.

### Prepare the build

Open a `terminal` and go to the folder where you cloned the repository. For example `C:\jenkinsci\packaging\`.
You now have to declare where you downloaded the Jenkins war file so the build can find it.

```powershell
$env:War = "$env:USERPROFILE\jenkins.war"
```

If you ever moved it into your repository clone folder, you can use this command instead:

```powershell

> $env:War = "C:\dev\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.war"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$env:War = "C:\jenkinsci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.war"
```
I've missed that `dev`

Should you ever need to rebuild a Jenkins MSI on your Windows machine, here is a way to do it.

# Pre-requisites

## Jenkins WAR file

First of all, you should get the Jenkins war file that will be inside that MSI file.
You can get it from the official Jenkins website or from the Jenkins update center.

> I will use the official Jenkins website in this article.

Reviewer: It's a doc not an article or a blog post, not sure I'd use "I" and this formulation. Idem for the following "for me".
(Subjective)

Author: You're right.

Check [Jenkins download page](https://www.jenkins.io/download/) and download the latest weekly version of Jenkins for example.

> For me, it is [jenkins.war](https://get.jenkins.io/war/2.380/jenkins.war) version 2.380.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently it is [jenkins.war](https://get.jenkins.io/war/2.380/jenkins.war) version 2.380.
```

Change the URL according to the version you want to download.

## Git tool

You have a few options here:
* Install [Git for Windows](https://community.chocolatey.org/packages/git)
* Use your IDE to clone the repository
* Use [GitHub Desktop](https://desktop.github.com/)
* Use [SourceTree](https://www.sourcetreeapp.com/)
* Use Cygwin integrated [Git command](https://cygwin.com/packages/summary/git.html)

> * [...]

Reviewer: Off topic? I would simply specify git as requirement and a link to the official website.

Author: Done. Thanks.

## Install MSBuild

You can install [MSBuild](https://aka.ms/vs/17/release/vs_BuildTools.exe) from Visual Studio or from the [Build Tools for Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/#build-tools-for-visual-studio-2022).

This command line tool is used to build the MSI file.

## Install .NET Framework 3.5

You may already have it installed on your machine, but not activated.
You can activate it from the Windows Features dialog box.

> To access this dialog box, smash the `WinKey` plus `R`, then enter the command `appwiz.cpl` and push enter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To access this dialog box, smash `<kbd>⊞ Win</kbd> + <kbd>R</kbd>, then enter the command `appwiz.cpl` and push enter.
```
GitHub highlights the keyboard element with a specific button-like design.

Reviewer: Not sure if there is a better display on your side but here is how this square character is rendered on Mac (seems unrecognized?):
<img width="191" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/91831478/220894291-ce1fe445-b238-4737-90cd-9eb6fc3caec3.png">

Also, in your suggestion the first backtick should be removed ;)

Reviewer 2: Looks correct. It's unicode, similar to [⌘](https://www.compart.com/en/unicode/U+2318).

  FileListen-US.txt -builtoutputsfile obj\Release\jenkins.wixproj.BindBuiltOutputsFileListen-US.txt -wixprojectfile C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\
  jenkins.wixproj obj\Release\jenkins.wixobj
  Windows Installer XML Toolset Linker version 3.11.1.2318
  Copyright (c) .NET Foundation and contributors. All rights reserved.

  jenkins -> C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\bin\Release\en-US\jenkins-2.380.msi
Done Building Project "C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\jenkins.wixproj" (default targets).

Build succeeded.
    0 Warning(s)
    0 Error(s)

Time Elapsed 00:00:08.26
```

## Find the MSI file

The MSI file is located in the `.\bin\Release\en-US\` folder.
You will find there the generated MSI file and its `sha256` file.

```powershell
 ls

    Directory: C:\dev\jenkins\git\ci\packaging\msi\build\bin\Release\en-US

Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name
----                 -------------         ------ ----
-a----        01/12/2022     20:53      105107456 jenkins-2.380.msi
-a----        01/12/2022     20:53             84 jenkins-2.380.msi.sha256
```

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

You may already have it installed on your machine, but not activated.
You can activate it from the Windows Features dialog box.

> To access this dialog box, smash `<kbd>⊞ Win</kbd> + <kbd>R</kbd>, then enter the command `appwiz.cpl` and push enter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access this dialog box, smash <kbd>⊞ Win</kbd> + <kbd>R</kbd>, then enter the command `appwiz.cpl` and push enter.
```
